What can unlocking a healthy gut do for
your life?
>> It can recenter one of the most
important organs we have and really with
that have all these second and third
hands effects that you wouldn't even
maybe have thought of. All these
influences [music] on your mental
health, on just your sleep quality, on
your metabolism, on your weight, on how
you just feel emotionally during the
day. It's sometimes more important than
genetics.
>> [music]
>> And why would you not want to get into
something that is so easy to influence
and change and then has such a wide
reach on every aspect of your health.
>> [music]
>> What's the biggest myth about the gut
that you wish would disappear?
>> I think a lot of people are afraid that
it's like too fragile, too sensitive,
too stupid to handle things. And the gut
is a very robust organ. If you treat it
right and understand it most of the
time, it can take a lot actually. And so
sometimes when people think they have
all kinds of sensitivities, some people
do and then for other people's it's more
something that damaged the gut. So now
when all these foods come into contact,
fructose, gluten, dairy and so on and so
on, the gut always has an issue but
that's more because it has an underlying
general issue that you have to first
take care of and then when it's all
healed up and doing well again, you
probably are able to eat all these foods
again. But people then stop entirely,
especially with IBS for example, and
they say I can't have all of these
things and I would say it you're right,
you're not imagining this or you really
can't at the moment but it's not
because, you know, your stupid gut can't
take it but because there's something
underlying that we need to fix first and
then slowly and surely you'll be able to
have all these things again. Sometimes
people have a little bit of a wrong view
of the what their body is actually still
capable of and what medicine and like
things from the outside can do to it.
>> What are the most common signs uh that
the gut is not healthy?
>> Very simple things are just the basics.
Do you have a belly ache? How is
digestion? Your body basically sends you
a text every morning when you go to the
bathroom. Might check it out. It's free.
Just turn around and look. And then also
some other things are also a bit more
subtle when you look at the effect of an
unhealthy gut on symptoms like anxiety,
risk of depression, just an immune
system that's out of check maybe
influenced [clears throat] by some
disturbances in the gut has an impact.
>> If someone wanted to improve their gut
health, what should they eat more of?
>> I would say eat more of things that you
really like, but that are luckily also
healthy. That's always the first step.
Because what I see often times in in
clinic was that people would eat these
things because they heard they were
healthy, but they hated them and then
they just stuffed their face with the
stupid kale that you know. And then
always I said, "Oh no, that's not good.
Let's look at like all these vegetable
and fruit there are. Which ones of those
do you like?" Cuz there'll be one or two
that you like. And it's often way easier
to go from there and then starting
having just a bit more of that healthy
stuff. Some people really like
asparagus. Others will not mind having
an onion more, you know, putting it in
your sauce when you have like some
ready-made sauce. Like just things you
don't mind or that you really like the
taste of and then have a little bit more
[clears throat] of them. And I think
that's always the starting point.
Because drastically changing the diet
also putting way more fiber in all of a
sudden will just make you gassy or
bloated because your gut is not used to
that. And your microbes suddenly get all
these foods. It's like a forest and then
you just dump some fertilizer on it.
What's that going to do, you know?
Slowly change your diet, but with the
things you like and the microbes like.
That's a good compromise.
>> Are there better foods for gut health?
Like what would those be? Like what are
the best foods for gut health?
>> It is
individual for some people because gut
microbes are individual. Some people
might have gut microbes that when they
eat beans, it's wonderful. They got all
their fiber, they do all the nice
things. Some other people have got
microbes where they are horribly bloated
when they eat beans. And this relies on
your gut microbes. So, I would say look
at the different vegetables and fruit
you if you want to, then go ahead and
look for their fiber content. You will
always have two types of fiber. One is
water soluble, the other is water
non-soluble. What does that mean? That
means for example cereal or the skin of
an apple for example. It has fiber that
are not able to fully dilute into
something gel-like when they are mixed
with water. They'll just stay a bit like
sturdy fibrous stuff. And those can
mostly not be digested by the microbes
because they're tough to really crack
up. And they will just form
bulk. And this bulk is good because it
will knock on the walls of the gut and
be like and the gut is very curious so
it bounces back and this propels like
digestion. This is really what gets your
regular bowel movement so it's good to
have. But this other type of fiber, the
water soluble one, is usually what makes
up the fruity flesh of the apple for
example and in asparagus or when you
just have carbs like rice and noodles
and so on. If you cook them once, let
them cool down, suddenly their content
of like resistant starch and so with
that soluble water soluble fiber rises.
So just having your carbs cooked, cool
them down and then you can even reheat
them, makes them more prebiotic. So it
prebiotic meaning food for good microbes
in the gut. There are things that are
good for the microbiome like let's say
beans,
onions, you know, green leafy
vegetables. But if you don't crave them
at all, start with ones that you crave
cuz then that might mean you actually
have the microbes that are eating them
that make you want to eat it.
>> How did you get interested in the body?
>> I think it all started in my teenage
years when I suddenly got a skin disease
um and I realized that I know nothing
about my body. I'll be hanging around in
this body, you know, for another 70
years or so, and I just don't know how
to like understand all these processes
with this suddenly coming from and I
have to go to a doctor who tells me
then, "I'll just put this on it." Helps
a little bit, then comes back and I
realized, "Oh, I just have to like do
what he says cuz I have no idea." And
then I started reading and I started
like being surprised and understanding
so much more. Also realizing that it
gives you quite a friendly kind of power
when you know more about the body.
>> What was the skin condition?
>> Well, I had like these open wounds
coming up and then he said, "Oh, it's
like eczema or something." And I put
steroids on it and it went away, but
then it just came back. And I thought,
"Well, this can't be it for the rest of
my life, you know, so what else is
there?" And I found all these things
about the gut, about after probiotics
sometimes things like this can pop up or
how food can even show up on the skin.
So, that was just a topic I got into and
then I tried all these things very
unscientifically at the same time, this
and this and a little bit of that.
But after a while I realized, "Oh, it
was getting better." I could visibly see
how it was getting better and how I
could help myself just by trying things
out and by having more knowledge.
>> You were experimenting on yourself.
>> Yes, definitely.
>> It
>> Some of the things I wouldn't recommend
today with the knowledge I have now, but
you know, I I was young and just
did it.
>> What was one of the crazier things you
tried?
>> I overdosed on zinc and then I really
back then I just got a really sensitive
smell. Like I could smell things from
further away. At least that was my
impression and experience.
>> Wait, so if you overdose on zinc, you
can get like a superpower?
>> I read later on that this may be
possible. And I just had this happening
to me, so I thought, "Oh, well, wow,
okay."
>> And is that when you decided you wanted
to be a doctor?
>> Yeah, before that I wanted to go into
like energy engineering. Um I'd already
done like internships and I was really
into that, but then I realized, oh, I
can read these medical texts and even
like papers or books for hours on even
if I'm really tired. And so, something
within this topic is like grabbing my
attention and it's really easy for me to
get into. And especially when I
discovered the gut, that was it. From
there on, you know.
>> What's the link between the gut and the
immune system?
>> Well, there's lots of immune cells
residing in the walls of our gut and
they're checking out what's going on. At
least in you know, the gut is one of
>> like the heart of our immune
>> system?
I mean, the immune system has different
locations where it's being trained, but
the gut is a very large and a very
center one. Because especially there's
all these exchange happening with the
outside world. When you look at us from
the outside, you would almost think the
skin is the biggest surface to the
outside world, but the gut is a huge one
where you have all these substances
coming in crossing the wall into the
blood of our So, that's a quite intense
process. And of course, the immune cells
cells will be there to just see what's
going on and really be sure that there's
nothing, you know, wrong happening.
[laughter]
And there they'll also learn tolerance.
Usually in an healthy gut, that's the
training boot camp of tolerance. They'll
be like, some peanut came, but it was
all right. Our cells are still doing
fine. And then all these immune cells
are gathering and saying, oh, this is
peanut. It's It's a
seems to be quite okay because we're
still doing fine. And
sounds like a really funny process, but
it's happening every day all the time.
They're just training this tolerance.
And of course, then when your gut cells
aren't doing so well, there's maybe
little wounds or it's been stressed or
the protective mucus layer is down, then
the immune cells might be wondering,
hmm, maybe the peanut is not so good for
us because the cells aren't looking so
good. So, should I be watching out for
peanut next time? So, these are some of
the processes that can lead, for
example, to sensitivities or allergies
or just a gut that's not feeling well.
>> There's a lot of supplements that are
pre- and probiotics. Are there foods
that we could take for the prebiotics?
>> Definitely. It's all the same stuff.
It's have your veggies, heavy fruit.
It's uh
>> So, they have prebiotics in them?
>> Absolutely. And as I said, usually in
the in the fruit, you see that the the
skin of [clears throat] the apple, for
example, has the water non-soluble
fiber, and then the flesh has the water
soluble fiber. And those are prebiotic.
And you can basically pick any
vegetable. Then you have some like
banana that have a little less, but if
you pick a green banana, for example,
the starches are not yet unpacked, so
it's not so sweet cuz unpacking the
starches making some sugar out of them
makes the banana sweet. But if it's
really green, then this hasn't happened
so much. So, there's more prebiotic in
them. So, that's why in some countries
green bananas are also used when you
have some diarrhea because they might
help with feeding good microbes, which
then fight off the diarrhea
diarrhea-causing microbe.
>> Is fiber like the most important thing
that most people don't think about very
much?
>> Fiber is maybe an overlooked thing
because we have managed to produce foods
that just have less and less fiber
because the caloric density is again
higher, that makes the dopamine cells go
yay. Then we will rather pick those. But
I think the effects of fiber are just so
nice. When you look at metabolic health,
for example, we've seen one study that
that I like to quote is when you looked
at
Pacific Islands where the rice cooker
was introduced. People put on a lot of
weight.
And that one aspect hypothesis of this
paper mentioned and explained was that
the rice was suddenly now not cooked and
then cooled down and then reheated, but
it was cooked and just stayed warm. So,
the all the starches and the
carbohydrates in the rice were so
superly fast accessible that the glucose
in the blood spikes, goes down, you get
hungry, you need another snack. But if
you have the rice cool down, the starch
crystallizes again, and then when you
eat it, it takes more time and more
enzymes to unpack this crystallized
starch. So, then it slowly gets your
blood sugar up and then down again. So,
you don't have this ch- And this also is
good for your, you know, weight because
when they then had people cool down the
rice after cooking again, what people
would also lose weight again. So, you
see that it's sometimes not only about
the number of calories that's on the
package, but really also how you prepare
these foods that then will make a
metabolic impact.
>> Are there any other foods like rice like
that where if you let them
>> when you have noodles, when you have
potato, when you have rice, uh these
typical starches when you cook them and
you cool them down, they get more
prebiotic.
So, potato salad, for example,
wonderful. Or just having cooked
potatoes in the fridge and then making
um them fry them up again with a little
bit of olive oil or something, you know?
That's already better for the microbes
than just having them all.
>> And do we need a wide variety of fiber
or is it something where we can just
consume one or two foods and get all the
fiber we need?
>> No, the thing there's this rule, I
think, by Tim Specter who made this
prominently and it's it's very good and
he made all the wonderful research for
that, that if you have about 30
different types of fruit and vegetable a
week, then you're really in a good
window where there's so much variety of
different foods that there can be a
variety of different microbes eating
them in your gut, which then contributes
to your health.
>> Does eating fiber reduce your risk of
cancer?
>> Yes.
>> Why?
>> When you look at cancer, there's
different types of cancer. We have a
hereditary kind of colon cancer, for
example, but we have also colon cancers
where we now have the leading indicators
that the microbiome play a part in it.
And also, when you look at fiber, what
it does is also propel digestion. So,
for example, all this metabolized stuff
that really is ready to just get out of
your body doesn't sit there for very
long releasing also possible toxins, for
example,
and they then come in contact with your
gut cells. So, there is a type of
pro-inflammatory or then even
pro-cancerous processes that are being
influenced positively by fiber. And that
is one by influencing the gut
microbiome, two by influencing just the
process of digestion itself, and then
three also effects that have to do with
metabolic risks of cancer. So fiber
and the way it slows down the intake of
blood sugary things for example, when
you have spikes of blood sugar all the
time, this can be pro-cancerous by
multiple roots by making the immune
cells a bit more aggressive by then, you
know, promoting pro-inflammatory causes.
So it's a very complex building, but the
simple answer is yes.
Fiber can protect you of colon cancer
for example, and then other cancers that
are related to those metabolic processes
that I mentioned.
>> What causes the inflammation inside of
us that you mentioned?
>> For example, very simple link is sugar.
When you look at sugar, it is high
energy and immune cells will realize
that they have now this budget of energy
to spend. And of course they are
pro-safety, and of course they say, "Oh,
I'd rather have some more safety guards
and some unnecessary inflammation than
too little." So this is a little bit the
tendency they're leaning towards. Well,
because when you look at our history,
thousands of years, it's always better
to have this additional safety, but we
rarely ever had enough energy for that.
Our energy budget was always
limited, cut off at the very, you know,
necessary things. And suddenly we have
all this energy to spend. And then the
immune system as we see is a bit
switched on by sugar. It goes a bit more
into the aggressive direction because it
can, you know.
And this is one process that sugar will
tip off. And we see for example people
drinking soft drinks high in sugar for
10, 20 years, they have a significant
elevated risk of like inflammatory
diseases. And this isn't always the one
cause why someone has an inflammatory
disease. It's different other
possibilities, pollution in in our
are making the immune cells irritated
and aggressive, our genetic um
predisposition where there's less
calming signals you know in an immune
system for example, all these other
things. But for example, sugar is one of
them and it can tip off these processes
and this then can have a range of
effect.
>> And there's different types of sugar,
too, right? Like there's naturally
occurring sugar in fruits.
But then there's like white sugar that's
refined and then high fructose corn
syrup.
>> That is true and you can definitely say
that this like concentrated high
fructose corn syrup is like one of the
ones where we see these
ungood effects if it's administered in a
too high dose the clearest. But I'm I'm
not convinced by these things saying
have a date instead because there's just
the same molecule in it. The fiber of
the date and might slow it down the take
up a little bit. But if you have like,
you know, dates that have been made to
be this big and super sweet then they're
also full of sugar. So I would say don't
kid yourself.
>> All right. I want to talk poo.
>> Yes, that's
>> [laughter and gasps]
>> You became famous partly for making
people think differently about poop
including myself.
What are we still getting wrong about
poop?
>> Well, I think the thing to get wrong is
just to ignore it really. In Germany you
have two different kinds of toilets. We
have one toilet where it goes into the
water which is I think the American and
Canadian types that you will know of as
well. And then we have this toilet which
is has a presenter. It's
like
so you will just have it presented there
and from here you can flush it then with
water but you will really see and also
not to go into too much detail but you
will smell a little bit more too. So
there it's really hard to ignore. Um but
I mean, you can also look at it in in
other ways. There's for example the
behavior it has when it's floating. When
there's no air bubbles in it at all that
means bacteria haven't really done their
work at that job there so it sinks to
the bottom immediately without sometimes
swimming a little bit. So, that's a sign
that you're not digesting properly, for
example. Can be a sign. Then, if you
have lots of fats in your stool still,
it's a sign that maybe you're not
digesting fats really well. You might
even get that checked out if it's very
prominently there. Then, of course, you
have just things like structure and
color where you can get some hints from.
Um
as I said, really black color or blood
reddish color, that's always a warning
signal. There's also things like
it being a bit more to the greener side
or yellowish or something. And gray is a
warning signal as well. And then when it
comes to consistency, I think um this is
for most people probably the thing that
they realize the most. You know, we have
the Bristol stool scale. It's written
in wonderful like British language with
like
you know, uh smooth and soft like a
snail or something.
>> [laughter]
>> It's really fun to check it out if you
want to. But there you can see that if
you go more to the constipated side,
what
forms are already indicating that. Um
and then you can of course also realize
diarrhea or stool being too soft, I
think often times is an overlooked
problem because it can mean that your
mucus is not intact or your digestion is
not going so well. There is um maybe
that is predominantly German, I don't
know, but I can say that people were
also a bit embarrassed about the topic
when it all started in Germany 10 years
ago. But there's like a literature piece
where they describe like the holy
perfect way where you go to the toilet
and you don't wouldn't even have had to
wipe because it was so perfect that
there was no wiping necessary.
>> [laughter]
>> So, I think what that actually
indicates, and that was way before we
realized this scientifically, is that
when you have a very proper intact gut
mucus lining, then it will really
surround the last bit of digested stuff
and really pack it up so it doesn't
really touch much um of your skin or
mucus area when it comes out and it just
is a clean business.
>> What about size? The toilet cloggers is
>> Well, the perfect toilet cloggers would
be the one where they just have so much
fiber that this really gives them a lot
of bulk or mass or whatever. Um, and
then the not so perfect ones is when
really you're not digesting so well, so
you haven't taken up all the food and
too much of it comes out unprocessed
basically. That is not such a good
thing. And then sometimes you can see it
even as a side effect of antibiotics
because the antibiotics kill off all
these bacteria and they have quite some
weight. They have a mass, you know. They
are sometimes described as an organ of
its own. So you're basically losing a
little bit or a bigger part of that
organ and that can sometimes amount to a
bigger volume, but it's not necessarily
a bad thing if you can handle it well.
>> How do we rebuild our gut after a dose
of antibiotics?
>> People in different life stages are more
susceptible to the like disadvantageous
changes antibiotics induce. So we see
especially small kids and, um, seniors,
um, in studies that they have a harder
time going back to their microbiome
after round and of antibiotics. Then we
have all the adults in the middle area
of this. For them it's like 50/50. Some
of them will actually go back quite well
and others will never replenish the
microbes they've lost. And some of them
might have been even like some nice
family in inheritance pieces, so to say,
but they will not get back and that used
to protect them of certain diseases or
things before. So it is not with an easy
hand that you should administer
antibiotics just for every cold you
have. And especially in the United
States, I have to say, um, we see that
this is a problem that is maybe
responsible for the
high number of people having problems
with their gut. So that being said, what
can you do? Of course you can have
probiotics especially when you start
having diarrhea while you're being on
antibiotics. We've seen studies that
probiotics help with antibiotic-induced
diarrhea. So, especially for children
also and the elderly, as I said, but
also with grown-ups experiencing
diarrhea that is an indicator probiotics
could be helpful. Then we see that when
you take probiotics after a round of
antibiotics, there is two effects. One
is that they can help lower your pH
value by, for example, bifidobacteria or
lactobacilli who produce these acids
can have a beneficial effect cuz you
know, again, good bacteria thrive in
those environments, others might not, so
it it will help. But it can also have an
effect that they take up niche and room
of your initial microbes. And then when
you stop taking them, they're
[clears throat] gone and yours don't
return the same way because they were
being like kind of like pushed to the
side. So, it's not only a good thing.
So, this is where prebiotics are also
really important. As I said, feeding
your good microbes that will actually
stay with you and that feed off like
good foods.
>> What are the warning signs that someone
should see a doctor instead of trying to
fix it themselves?
>> Well, the typical warning signs are just
like heavy, like extreme, like really
pain that you don't usually have or
don't know. Then we always have the
black or the bloody stools that you
should get checked out of. Weight loss,
night sweats, those are like the really
severe common ones, but also things like
if you have a
tendency towards diarrhea and it lasts
more than three, four days, then I would
also think of having
that checked. And then if you have a
really bad constipation, for example,
um that can be something that you
already know, you've had it since you
were a child or you've had it for a long
time, then I would always say it's not
uh
an act of immediate attention, but it
can always be improved. So, it makes
sense to go somewhere and check some
things out, but if it's suddenly stop
starting, that suddenly you're
constipated and you don't even know why.
You didn't used to be like that. That's
something you should also have checked
out pretty soonish. Yeah.
>> Are we pooing wrong?
>> There is an aspect that is a bit
disadvantage. And this is this um
seat of toilet that looks like a chair,
you know? And we sit on it in a posture
that we would usually know from, you
know, sitting on a chair. And our body
has the smart mechanism of having a
muscle going around the end of the gut
and then, you know, holding it back a
little bit so that we stand or when we
sit in that position, not all of it is
like immediately in the position to come
out. So, it creates this curve.
When we put our legs up a little bit,
you could say like a 30° angle from just
being horizontal, then this gets
loosened up. And then there's not this
curve anymore, but it's rather a bit
straight. And, you know, this is just
the natural position when we squat
outdoors when we go to the toilet. And
this is then
a better, anatomically [clears throat]
speaking, a better way to go to the
toilet because you need less pressure
and you're not pressing against, uh you
know, your own muscles holding stuff
back. And this way can reduce the risk
of hemorrhoids or diverticulosis, which
we see less of in countries where people
still use a squatting position when they
go to the toilet. So, it is a good idea
to maybe try to emulate this. And you
can do so with a little stool in front
of your toilet where you just, you know,
put your feet on. I've heard now so many
people report back to me that this has
helped them or that they really miss it
now when they go elsewhere. They will
use like the tiny bin in the hotel
toilet to put in front of the toilet so
that they have this position because it
just feels more natural. And there's
been a study on that um by Dov Sikirov,
a researcher who compared these
different sitting positions and could
show that it's much easier or also feels
better for people that they really got
everything out when they are rather in
that situ- like position than in a
normal chair stool position.
>> The sponsor of this show is CoinShares.
While most of the industry was still
arguing about whether digital assets
were legitimate, CoinShares was quietly
building the infrastructure to invest in
them properly. They now manage over 6
billion in assets and have stayed
profitable through every market cycle.
Fully regulated with the kind of
transparency and governance that serious
investors actually expect. Whether it's
crypto ETFs, active strategies, or
Bitcoin mining ETF exposure, you can
access all of it through your existing
brokerage account. CoinShares, the
adults have arrived. Learn more at
coinshares.com. This is not investment
advice.
You're in meetings all day. You're
trying to stay present, but you're also
worried you'll forget the decision, the
action item, the important next step.
That's where Granola comes in. Granola
is an AI-powered notepad for meetings.
You jot down rough notes like you always
do, and in the background, Granola
transcribes and turns them into clear,
useful notes when the meeting ends.
There are no bots joining your calls, no
distractions, just a clean notepad that
helps you focus. During or after the
call, you can chat with your notes. You
can ask Granola to pull out action
items, help you negotiate, make a
decision, write a follow-up email, and
so much more. I even use it when I'm
listening to podcasts. Once you try it
on a first meeting, it's hard to go
without. Head to granola.ai/shane
and get 3 months free with the code
Shane. That's granola.ai/shane.
>> What does constipation actually mean?
>> Constipation um can is well, the problem
of having the feeling you're not really
emptying all the way when you go to the
toilet, of having a too hard to too
difficult time to go to the toilet. You
really need a lot of force to get stuff
out, or even need to like help a little
bit, manipulate so that you can get it
out. It can be too hard. So, these
little pieces of stool like a goat would
have, for example, is a good indicator
that it has just spent too much time in
the gut already got all the liquids and
then some more. So, it's really like
dehydrated a little bit. Those are
different aspects and can have different
causes. For some people, it's just in
the very end that they're having a hard
time coordinating it really getting out.
For others, it's all the way before that
that it's too slow. It's at somewhere
it's being like not transported fast
enough. And that can happen with a low
fiber diet where you just like have
pizza and pasta and white flour and
that's it basically. So, there's
different causes for that. But, um a way
to handle it is almost always easy and
has really great results. And I've
personally never experienced a patient
that didn't get better with just some
simple tricks here and there. And then,
of course, there are some severe cases
where really something's off motility
disorders where since birth you've had a
super horrible hard time to go to the
toilet. And there we need to be a bit
more creative, but there's also
wonderful solutions for that now.
>> What are the tips and tricks when you
say that?
>> Some more fiber, some more probio-
probiotics in your diet. There's things
like flaxseed, chia seeds, um these
things that you really need to add some
additional water also to really have
them soak up and really, you know, have
some material that the gut then can
propel forwards. Those are very simple
things.
>> How important is chewing?
>> Chewing is a good thing if you want to
take some work off your stomach off the
hands of your stomach cuz the stomach
really then has to
get all this muscular work going if
things are not chewed correctly. And
it's exit, so to say, will only let very
tiny particles through. So, if you don't
chew well, it has just a bit more stuff
to do. And also, you tell your brain
what kind of nutrients are coming in
when you're tasting them already. So,
actually just looking at certain foods
will start the process, but then really
having them in your mouth will already
get some things going and some juices
flowing. It's a nice thing, but I also
have to say a lot of the foods we eat
nowadays don't necessarily need the
chewing anymore. When you look at highly
or ultra-processed foods, they're so
almost falling apart into sugar
particles. White bread, white pastries,
white flour stuff.
I mean, you can chew, but it'll be very
soon just sugar in the very first
you know, inches [clears throat] of your
small intestine. It's all sugar going
into the bloodstream.
>> Go deeper on the ultra-processed foods
versus
sort of nature's foods, if you will.
>> So, when you look at all these advices
we get all the time about food, right?
There has been an era for something like
the Taylor Swift eras, you could almost
say. There's been the era of having low
fat
in order to not put on weight. There's
been an era of having everything less
sugar, sugar substitutes. Now, when we
look back at these
discoveries, scientific opinions, you
could say, but of course with evidence,
then you can say, "Well, they're not
entirely wrong, but they really weren't
entirely true also." And what we're
looking at now, which era are we in now?
I think this is now the era where we
say, "Ah, probably it's about the
ultra-processed foods that are bad." You
know, we still have some of the
remaining advice like, of course, don't
have too much sugar. That's still a very
good advice. And I think here, the nice
thing is to have a clear
amount, which is 25 g. This is what the
World Health Organization say. This is
the amount of sugar you can have without
it in the long run affecting your
health. And then when you look look at
fats,
it's still true to say it's good to have
like polyunsaturated fats are good,
olive oil. Don't heat it up too much
because then it breaks apart and can
like reshape chemically,
not be so good anymore. But those are
the things that still keep standing. But
the rest of it, people say, "Well,
rather have the full-fat yogurt, you
know,
because not engineering it so much or
also the way it is digested is a bit
more
natural to the body and doesn't have all
these horrible effects we
earlier thought." And now when we look
at people having diets without all these
additives, we see how healthy they are.
And we see even when we have people
stopping their usual diet with all these
processed foods and going back to a more
natural
diet without all these additives, we can
track all the effects and they right
away shown that it's much more healthier
for their body that's good on them. So
get an idea that oh, maybe
you know, that was the thing.
>> How long does that take if I if I stop
consuming, let's say I move from a diet
of highly ultra-processed foods
>> [clears throat]
>> to
more natural. How long does it take for
my body to adjust and start to show
signs of
progress?
>> Some effects you'll see after 3 days.
Some of might take, you know, 1, 2, or 3
weeks, but that's really the amount of
time. You hardly ever take more than
that in the department of the microbiome
to reach all these really nice good
changes cuz you know, they eat every
day. So if different foods comes in,
they adjust every day. And then of
course you have more
more long-term things metabolically
speaking, your cholesterol for example,
also just your overall immune function
or stress hormones. These things can
indirectly be influenced. And those will
take a little bit longer cuz you still
have all this storage fat for example,
when you talk about blood lipids
or also just feeling better when your
immune system is maybe not so angered by
some additives or food processes or just
a sensitive
gut wall. This is I think a bit more
individual and could take a bit longer.
>> I wanted to see if an AI version of me
could actually hold its own. So I built
one with HeyGen. Let's see if it was
paying attention. Hi Shane, digital you.
Every book, every episode, every
newsletter, I've read it all. Try me.
Pick a book I recommend constantly. Tell
me one idea from it that I actually use.
Annie Duke, Thinking in Bets, Resulting.
A good decision can have a bad outcome.
A bad decision can get lucky. Judge the
process, not the result. You taught me
that one. I just remember it better.
Okay, that landed. That's HeyGen. Record
yourself for 15 seconds and get an AI
avatar that delivers professional video
on demand. No camera, no crew, in over
175 languages. Already used by 30
million people including 85% of the
Fortune 100. Your first three videos are
free at heygen.com. That's h e y g e
n.com.
Ever hit 3:00 p.m. and feel like your
brain just quit? For a lot of people,
that's not caffeine or sleep. It's
electrolytes. And water alone won't fix
it. That's why I drink Element every day
after lunch. Zero sugar, no dodgy
ingredients, just a real dose of sodium,
potassium, and magnesium.
I know you're all thinking electrolytes
are for athletes, but you don't have to
be an athlete to benefit from it. And it
tastes great. Stay sharp in the
afternoon and grab a free eight-count
sample pack with any purchase at
drinkelement.com/tkp.
That's drink l m n t.com/tkp.
It seems like a lot of the
knowledge that we've had over the years,
the low fat/low sugar,
also led to more processed foods. So, in
order to reduce fat, we came up with
substitutes for fat. In order to reduce
sugar, we came up with substitutes, too.
Is that true?
>> Yeah, that's true. Especially when you
talk about the low fat, there were all
these processes to remove to have um
that But I think what is actually a bit
more the culprit here is the dopamine.
Uh we have a lot of processed foods
because we make it more appealing to our
dopamine releasing cells. When they
realize that you have a very high
caloric density, they reward it because
it means you ate just something very
little, but it gave you a lot of energy.
So, little investment, lot of turnout,
and that is what those cells are about.
And they reward it, not knowing what it
does in the long term sometimes. And
unconsciously oftentimes, but nowadays
also targeted and very consciously, food
industry has seen, okay, this is my
target audience. Those are the cells
that rave when something comes in, and
they will motivate you to buy it again
and again and have some more of it even.
So, I think
it's not really only the mistake or the
wrongdoing of these hypotheses
nutrient-wise or health-wise, but really
also a dopamine system that screens out
for reward louder and louder these days.
And it understandably does though
because it's being like, how do you say,
wrenched?
>> Yeah.
>> By social media, by processes that are
not so fulfilling by time sometimes
getting a bit tougher. People want a
good feeling, and food is a way to get
it.
>> Is one way to think about food when
you're in the grocery store just to look
at the ingredient list and and a good
sort of like heuristic is the fewer
ingredients the better?
>> Yes, and I do this all the time. And
sometimes I'm really surprised as what I
find when I look on the ingredients
lists. Some things marketed as super
healthy
um and then you look at like this nice
uh with all these foods and all this
fiber and you look and it has like 40%
sugar.
That is like, what? Or some drinks they
are oh, it's super healthy, wonderful
juice, blah blah blah, and it has more
sugar than Coca-Cola has. And I'm a bit
like drawn to doing this now, and I buy
these ready-made foods, and I have them
as well. I think it's really difficult
to cut them out entirely. Whatever half
got is able to do that, applaud to you,
but I think if you have a good like
80/20 ratio, you're good. So, 20%
processed foods or stuff from the
supermarket, fine. And then, if you
manage to get, you know, to the 80% of
like real foods that come like that from
the soil or the tree,
good balance. But, yeah, check out the
ingredients list. And I check for um
MCM. This is the methylcellulose and the
polysorbate 80, so PS80, and
carrageenans. It's really sometimes
almost horrible to look at what
substances are in these products. So,
really go for the companies that look
out for your health as well, you know.
>> What's the effect of alcohol on our gut
microbiome, outside of
sort of the obvious symptoms that people
would think of with people who consume
too much alcohol? Like, how would it
manifest itself in our poop and our
digestion?
>> I don't know if you have this term, and
it's not necessarily a pretty one,
either. But, in Germany, we have this
term of bierschiss,
>> [laughter]
>> which means when you have too much beer,
then you will just have this
ungood poo, where you're like, "Oh, this
is bierschiss."
>> [laughter]
>> It's too It's too soft. It smells funky.
It's something where you realize that
wasn't a good idea, you know. And it's a
mixture of alcohol annoying the immune
cells, alcohol not being good on the
nerve cells, alcohol um
getting chaos into the microbiome. So,
all of this comes together and gives you
this weird weird text message on your
toilet in the next morning saying, "What
was that?"
>> It's like our body's speaking to us,
right? Like, it's giving us feedback.
>> Well, it it is definitely a form of
feedback, yes.
>> What does coffee do?
>> With coffee, it it contains uh
polyphenols. It It contains
antioxidants. So, it is not necessarily
a bad thing. The thing that can be a
problematic is the caffeine in it. If
you have lots and lots of caffeine, it
um has an effect on your dopamine
system, not like drugs, but it um
elevates the response of the dopamine
system. So, that's actually also what
you really wish for, the email of your
boss saying, "Wonderful work, feels just
a bit better, a bit more motivating,
you're just bit a bit more like active
fit in the day. And this is good, nice
to have, we like to have it, but in in
too large of an amount and that is the
case when people then really have sort
of withdraw when they don't have it in
on vacation or somewhere in the plane or
whatever,
um then this becomes I think a
bit problematic. And then you might
think also of sleep because we've seen
all the studies and rarely ever is
science so clear on one point. There's
always multiple opinions usually, but
with coffee there's really not been a
study where you don't see an effect.
People will say, "But I have no trouble
falling asleep." But then you see in all
the measurements the quality of sleep
after falling asleep is poorer. And then
what do you need in the morning when you
wake up? Coffee.
So, it like becomes this vicious circle
where I think um this is a main factor
that then can influence the microbiome.
The polyphenols and antioxidants,
wonderful, they are actually good for
the microbiome, you could say, but you
can have them with decaf coffee just as
well. And then when you have your coffee
it within a time window select 12:00 to
p.m., 4:00 p.m.
perfectly fine and then you will be able
to sleep wonderfully, but people have
coffee after that
I don't believe them that it doesn't do
anything and I think if they could
switch to decaf and just check it out
for a few days and really be honest if
their sleep is better now. And then they
say it's not better at all, then you
know, you do whatever you want. But
before that experiment I would say have
the experiment.
>> Try it.
>> Yes, try it.
>> What effect does snacking have?
>> There's different approaches to um
frequency of food intake. Uh for some
people they will really notice a
difference when they keep a window of 4
hours in between meals. They will say,
"Oh, this is so much better for me now."
For others they don't. Um they get
too low blood pressure, they don't feel
so well. And so it is again something
where I would rather people listen to
their own instincts and then have a
healthy snack than say, "Oh, snacks are
not good, so I shouldn't at all." There
is some different um
opinions on
the time frame, like should we only eat
from 11:00 in the morning to 7:00?
Should we only eat when there's daylight
out? Should we only, you know, have
breakfast very large amounts of food and
then small dinner? Should we, you know,
there's all these different theories.
And I don't think there's a common thing
that is a solution for everyone, one
fits all. I think there's not something
like that. But it is good to experiment
with it and really find out for
yourself. And for example, when you look
at visceral fat, like this sudden belly
coming in in your 40s or something or
afterwards, then oftentimes you see some
improvement when you actually watch the
times where you eat and if you have some
time in between where you really don't
eat or if you say, "After 7:00 in the
evening, I won't have food until 10:00
in the morning." People will actually
realize that there are some differences
then. But as always, it's not a
one-fits-all and I would just have
people know about this and then
experiment rather than tell them what to
do.
>> I was talking to a friend of mine uh
before coming to see you today and she
mentioned a gut cleanse.
>> Mhm.
>> Is that useful? Is it not useful? What
is it?
>> In the beginning, I have to be honest, I
didn't like it at all because I thought
it's so invasive. It's people thinking
their gut cannot clean itself.
>> Mhm.
>> Because usually after 2 weeks, a gut
really replenishes all its cells. So, if
you just eat healthy for that time,
you're good, you know? But I have to
say, um I've heard so many patients um
saying that it helped with like pain in
the joints or with other things that I'm
still not thinking it's this perfect
solution for everything. It does have
risks. We've seen patients um with
trouble after or complications, not
many, but it it's not without risk. But
um for some they feel that it's good for
their health and I'm a person that says
that is the main thing. That is what
health is about. So if someone reports
that then I say, "Okay, good." But still
it shouldn't be done too much.
It is I think something to
resort to when things have gone really
wrong and you sort of feel like you need
a reset. We've experienced patients for
example with irritable bowel syndrome
after colonoscopy being suddenly way
better. And it's not because of the
colonoscopy I think because we just
checked with the camera for a few
minutes, but it's maybe because they
really cleaned cleaned everything out
and could restock their microbiome a bit
easier than they could have if
everything's just stuck in place and you
just throw some different foods on it.
So now I'm more open to it
and and think it does have interesting
effects that
I don't disregard anymore.
>> Talk to me about supplements.
>> So I think supplements and this whole
fascination about them
tickle me in a specific way. Once again,
as I said, if someone takes something
notices
uh
>> [clears throat]
>> immediate shift says that oh, I really
immediately feel like this because of
it, then go for it. Check if all the
dosages are right and if the quality is
good because there can be some troubles
with that, but then I'm not against it.
But that being said
>> [laughter]
>> we see that
normal healthy grown-ups usually don't
necessarily benefit from it. Some
supplements even has dis- have
disadvantages effects and big studies.
Really, I'm talking big studies like
vitamin E at a higher risk of people
smoke having lung cancer. So what what
was that all about? It's because you
don't know all the effects one substance
is will have on you. And there might be
things that just occur naturally and if
you have them powdered up or
concentrated or well, whatever, if it's
still in amount that's reasonable. But
what I find people will miss while
they're being on this whole supplement
journey is they really go for all these
nice slogans, but they miss the bigger
picture. And the bigger picture is the
picture that we have so much solid
research on and it's the things your
mama told you. It's sleeping well, it's
eating well, it's dealing with your
stress well, you know, um having some
joy in life also accounts to that.
Movement. And those are the things. And
this is the big bug. This is the 80% of
your health. And then some supplements
might do 1 or 2%. They're good to you,
but usually they don't don't do so much
more than this. And uh so weigh it, you
know. All this money, all this time
researching, you know, and then these
other things that have shown effects
that are so important, really maybe put
some of that time and energy and money
in these departments as well. That's all
I'm saying.
>> Why is a walk after a meal a good idea?
>> People will say that this helps you with
your blood sugar because activating your
muscles can really take um blood sugar
and nutrients into your muscles and get
them to work right away instead of just
putting them in storage, so to say. So
it's a hormonal metabolic reason. If
people stress too much, like if they
walk and their heart rises and they
breathe really fast, so it's a stressful
walk, then it's not necessarily good
because stress will then do opposite
effects. But if you really have a
comfortable walk, that's what you want
after a meal.
>> One of my close friends is doing this
experiment that I think you'll find
fascinating. So
he believes that food is the key to
healing.
>> Mhm.
>> Uh as I think you do based on this
conversation. But he's going into
hospitals cuz hospitals are this place
where they're supposed to make us better
and they feed us crap. At least in in
North America they don't always have the
best food.
And he's a famous restaurateur. And so
he's gone in and he's gotten rid of most
processed foods. He's reduced the level
of processing. And the theory, which I
think is starting to prove itself
correctly, is we can actually increase
the number of hospital beds by
effectively getting people out 1 day or
2 days earlier.
>> Mhm.
>> And we can do that through food because
a lot of what happens in hospitals is
people aren't eating, they're
malnourished.
>> Mhm.
>> Uh that slows [clears throat] recovery
and slows healing. I'd love your your
take on that.
>> I think that's a perfectly right
approach. And it just goes to show that
oftentimes when we try to make humans
adjust to the system instead of the
system adjusting to humans, we do a
stupid thing. We waste money, we waste
resources, and we make it less pleasant
and less nice uh for people. And that
goes for hospitals, that goes for
workplace, that goes for education. I
think there's so many areas in life
where we could just use the knowledge we
already have on the body and make
smarter choices that just benefit
everyone. I'm not saying, you know, be
all hippie about all the flowers.
Well, you can, it's nice. But I'm saying
it also makes sense in all these other
aspects economically, emotionally,
societal. Um and I would love to see
that more often. And especially like
when you talk about foods in hospitals
now, it's absolutely true. And the crazy
thing is we have all the research
showing it. We have the research on
wound healing after surgery, for
example, and the quality of foods, of uh
psychiatric diseases even. We have all
the research. But you know what? We do
in many other areas also when it comes
to really how you put together a
workplace, how you educate children, how
the brain learns the best. We have all
the research. We just don't do it. So
that's I think a shared goal here where
I try try to like make this knowledge in
a way palpable
that you can then use it rather than
just have it somewhere in the books.
>> Your work is about listening to the
body. What does it mean to listen to an
organ?
>> It, I think, means in the first place,
um and that's an easy place to start to
not cut it out of the picture, to not
ignore it. We will now have people, for
example, breathing dysfunctionally. So,
people at workplace might have this
phenomena where it's called
email apnea, where they hold their
breath when they hear the sound or they
see a new email coming in repeatedly
over the course of a day, or breathe
really fast and too too deep or
something, which really heightens the
level of stress hormones, makes the
muscles in the back clench up, sometimes
give them cold hands and feet, feeling
really stressed. Their workplace really
can also stress them, of course, but
there's an aspect of the body that we
overlook and we don't use to our
advantage just because we don't know of
it. Or other things like the gut
influencing depressive symptoms. Like
all these physical like influences on
our life, on our feelings, on our
performance. If we just would know them
to a degree that we don't ignore them
anymore, then we can use them. Then we
can have breath techniques like for 1
minute at 12:00 and 4:00 during the work
day, and it really takes off some of
these symptoms. You'd be surprised for
some people. We will have people
realizing they're noise sensitive when
they travel. This is part of where their
stress comes from. We will have students
realizing the type of learners they are
and be able to like learn better. So,
really I think what I want is people to
just have this smart body feeling that
they can actually use it to their
advantage and not be victim to like
mysterious processes that they find
overwhelming. Oftentimes not so much
knowledge that does that.
>> If someone changed only one thing about
their diet after listening to this
conversation, what would you want them
to change?
>> Something easy that the person likes and
maybe cooling down your starches before
you reheat them or just before you eat
them, and then pick one
vegetable that you like and just have it
a bit more often.
>> [laughter]
>> And then I think, you know, we haven't
talked about these things so much, but I
like to have people know that hygiene
isn't about disinfecting your hands all
the time. One of maybe most important
hygiene you can have is stress hygiene.
And understanding your way of going
about stress in the terms of hygiene, I
think is actually very beneficial for
the gut.
>> Go deeper on that.
>> What we see is that there's an effect of
stress um
that differs depending on how long the
stress goes on for. Short stress is not
necessarily bad because it's like
challenging your body. It's like doing a
bout of exercise where you're just like
doing something very difficult and then
uh you're going back to calm all again.
But stress that lasts longer than this
has more unhygienic effects because it's
not only a little challenge and then
going back. When you look at the gut
with a camera and then you really stress
out the person, the walls of the gut go
pale.
So they would usually be pinkish because
there's all this blood going on. Blood
flow is going [clears throat] great, you
know. But when stress happens the
vessels really
go small and the blood the gut doesn't
get so much energy anymore because your
system is giving all this energy to your
brain and muscles to solve the problem
or run away, you know. And then when
you're in stress, your gut will really
give up all of its energy. It's very
good willing, good natured organ that
says, "Oh, there's this big problem.
Can't digest in all, you know,
carefulness now." If you're really
stressed, some people even throw up or
have nervous diarrhea and that is just
to get all these tasks out of the system
so you don't have to deal with digestion
now. And so you can use the energy for
problem solving. The bad part is if this
goes on for too long, you're really
abusing this good willed organ and it
doesn't have enough blood flow and
energy to build enough protective mucus.
So your stomach might be sensitive or
your it like food particles get too
close to the gut and you're not having
enough blood flow to get all the immune
cells in the right direction. Your
immune cells might even get more
aggressive. This can have to do with
a lack of sleep. This can have to do
with the mucus layer being too thin. So,
suddenly they're exposed to all these
things. So, they're like, "What's this?
I don't like it." So, they get all
aggressive. And so,
your gut can get sensitive to food
suddenly or have problems that it
wouldn't have otherwise because it just
doesn't have the resources to deal or do
its job in the way it would usually do.
And over a few weeks, that can have very
detrimental effects. Also, some
microbes, and that is maybe the most
hygienic part of it all, they thrive on
stress hormones. They are really able to
deal with them very well, and others are
not. You're kind of making an atmosphere
for your gut. We're selecting gut
microbes that thrive in an environment
of distress, and those are not
necessarily the good ones we see at
least in studies now. So, seeing stress
as something unhygienic, I think, is
very accurate in that framework. And if
you disinfect your hands, you're just
making a lot of room. Suddenly,
everything here is dead, and whatever
comes next, if you touch a funny rail
or, you know, something from the air
flies there, it now suddenly has room.
So, if someone's sick and you're
touching it or, you know, pretty sure
you touched something dirty or so, you
know, go ahead. But the most important
stress, I think, is not disinfecting
your hands, but really looking out for
your inner stress hygiene.
>> So, we shouldn't be putting hand
sanitizer on our hands like 10 times a
day.
>> Maybe not 10 times a day. I have to say
I really like my my skin microbes.
Should really wash your hands when you
go home, and you touch your face and
your mouth and so on before that. But
other than that, I don't think it's so
beneficial. You just select some creepy
ones that don't care for the sanitizer.
>> [laughter]
>> What's one sentence you want people to
take away from this episode?
>> I think, really,
just the vitality and the wonderfulness
of being alive.
And it sounds so simple, but feeling
this a little bit maybe makes it easier
for you to, you know, do something for
your body. Just have your body.
And I've seen so many patients when they
were at the end of their lives, suddenly
realizing their body is so genius, was
so valuable. They had it all these
years. And it's good to see that, but
it's also a little bit late. I want
people to feel that earlier in life, so
that's not
one sentence, but it's really what I
would want people to take away.
>> Yeah. We always end interviews with the
same question, which is what is success
for you?
>> Success is
purpose rewarded by myself.
It is that I know I did something
purposeful, helpful, and I myself create
the rewarding feelings, not people
around them around me saying that was
great or something. Um and that is the
success that I feel most satisfied by.